---
title: "Yes, You're Allowed to Hate Billionaire - Here's Why"
meta_title: ""
description: ""
date: 2020-04-05T05:00:00Z
image: "/images/image-placeholder.png"
categories: ["Opinion", "Great Divide"]
author: "Melissa Da Costa"
tags: ["Billionaires", "Inequality"]
draft: true
---

As the world grapples with the COVID-19 pandemic, its
financial and economic impacts worsen – for most of us, anyway. Businesses are
going under, The job market is dismal, and millions don't have access to high
quality healthcare which is desperately needed in times like this. So, with
all that going on, what better time to discuss one of the greatest reasons so
many are struggling right now –wealth inequality. Lately, social media has
seen a spike in content detailing why billionaires shouldn't exist at all, and
really, they've made it so extremely easy for this belief to become popular
opinion. Let's take a look at why everyone's hating on billionaires and why
it's totally valid to do so – in fact, I'm actively encouraging it. Grab
yourself a warm beverage, and let's dive in.

> When the people shall have nothing more to eat, they will eat the rich
>
> – Jean-Jacques Rousseau

* * *

### Getting your head around a "billion"

The human brain is not equipped to handle large numbers. In fact, our brains
do it so poorly that not only do we struggle to envision a billion of
anything, but we frequently underestimate how much that number actually
represents. We're not to blame. Our brains simply didn't evolve for that
function. Let me help you out. If you wanted to save $1 billion, and you put
away $100 a day, it would take you (and your great grand-kids, and their
great-grandkids) over 27,397 years to reach your goal of $1 billion. 1 billion
steps could take you roughly 15.2 times around the equator. Even a million,
which sounds like a pretty big number, pales in comparison. While 1 million
seconds is about 11 days, 1 _billion_ seconds is a whopping 31 years (and
3/4). Now that many of us use electronic, rather than physical money, any sum
becomes something intangible and abstract. Couple that phenomenon with the
fact that our brains naturally don't know how to process how large a billion
actually is, and the reality of how much wealth the world's billionaires
possess when combined is enough to trigger migraines and heart palpitations.
[caption id="attachment_5929" align="aligncenter" width="512"] Visualisation
of 1 billion. Each block after the cube on top is ten times the size of the
previous block, giving a visualisation of the size of a cube one billion times
the size of the original cube, by CMG Lee. Source: Wikipedia Commons[/caption]

### What's wrong with being rich?

There's nothing wrong with reaping the rewards of one's efforts, but many who
sit comfortably at the top of the looming capitalist pyramid, go far beyond
that. In the USA the gap between the rich and the poor is now the biggest it's
been in half a century, and it's sparked a climate of suspicion towards the
ultra wealthy. Billionaires are coming under increased scrutiny this year, as
normal people begin to question whether their existence is doing more harm
than good. In January 2020, a report by Oxfam international found that the
world’s 2,153 billionaires have more wealth than 4.6 billion people . What
sounded aspirational in recent years is increasingly becoming synonymous with
income inequality, tax cuts and special interests. As the situation worsens
and the rich get richer, people are starting to sit up and take notice. Here
are some more fun facts to kick off this important conversation: [caption
id="attachment_5918" align="aligncenter" width="1286"] source:
https://indepth.oxfam.org.uk/time-to-care/[/caption] Whether you have biblical
leanings or not, the expression “It is easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God” has been with
us for thousands of years, as has our disdain for the mega-rich. In the United
States, **the top 0.1% of Americans own nearly as much wealth as the bottom
90%** , and the 400 richest Americans own more wealth than all black
households and a quarter of Latino households put together. The disparity is
massive, and it's growing every year. Even as millions around the world are
stumbling towards recession on account of a global health crisis, the 1% are,
somehow, thriving even more than before. According to Chuck Collins for _CNN
Business_, **the wealth of America's billionaires increased by almost 10% over
just three weeks at the start of the COVID-19 crisis took hold.** "Already,
the combined wealth of US billionaires is higher than a year ago, according to
our study," he writes. "At least eight of these billionaires have added
another $1 billion to their wealth during the pandemic". That’s particularly
true in the tech sector, where there are 8.4 percent more billionaires
globally as of May 2020 compared with the end of 2019– the highest uptick of
any sector. Included in the list of "pandemic profiteers", says Collins, are
Zoom CEO Eric Yuan and Steve Ballmer, former CEO of Microsoft, which owns
Skype and Teams – both of whom are profiting handsomely from the increase use
of video conferencing. Their 2020 success, however, still pales in comparison
to that of Amazon's Jeff Bezos. During the pandemic, Bezos's wealth has shot
up by a mind-boggling $25 billion as home-bound quarantiners increase their
amount of online shopping and streaming. " **This wealth surge for one
individual — greater than the entireGDP of Honduras — is unprecedented in the
history of modern markets"**, writes Collins. Honestly, just reading that line
and rewriting it here makes me feel more than a little nauseated. In 2019,
British Labour MP Lloyd Russel-Moyle received backlash for a BBC radio 5
appearance (that went viral) in which he claimed that billionaires shouldn't
exist. Writing for _the Guardian_ after the fact, Russel-Moyle stood by his
statement, saying he believes that hating the extremely wealthy is a very
common – and reasonable – notion. "No one – however smart or hardworking – is
worth a billion pounds or more," he writes. Speaking of the situation in the
UK, Russel-Moyle writes: "How is it acceptable that a country that can afford
to have billionaires can also afford to have 8 million people living in
poverty in families where at least one person is in work, 4 million of them
children? On a daily basis I am shocked by the suffering of many of my
constituents." He then quotes The US congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez
who, referring to the same issue in the USA, said that: “A system that allows
billionaires to exist when there are parts of Alabama where people are still
getting ringworm because they don’t have access to public health is wrong.”
During his presidential campaign, Bernie Sanders referred to the existence of
these ultra-rich men – and they usually are men – as a moral and economic
outrage. The support he garnered before dropping out of the presidential race
is testament to the fact that the working class is tired of them. They're
tired of putting in long hours every week to serve giant companies run by men
who own private planes and fat off-shore bank accounts.  And that leads us to
the root of the problem: The capitalists systems that dictate our societies
are strongly in favour of the wealthy at the expense of everyone else. These
systems which are ostensibly meant to serve society, are fact detrimental, and
therefore broken.

> “Every billionaire is a policy failure.”
>
> -Dan Riffle, an aide to Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez
>
> [caption id="attachment_5927" align="aligncenter" width="1400"] Bill
> GatesLacy O’Toole | CNBC[/caption]

### Hoarding wealth is undemocratic

Wealth is often used as a tool for political debate, but Russel-Moyle argues
that the belief that wealth should have a cap is far from an overly liberal
argument. "We now know that inequality costs us all economically," he writes.
"In a world with finite resources increasingly controlled by a handful of men,
it is actually the most conservative of positions to argue that their fortunes
should not exist". Increasingly, though, anti-billionaire sentiment in the USA
is coming from both the left and the right. When there's consensus between
those two rival clans, you know they're really on to something. When, echoing
Sanders, Elizabeth Warren proposed implementing a 2% "wealth tax" on those
with a net worth of $50 million, former New York mayor Michael Bloomberg
(worth an estimated $55 billion) adamantly claimed that “probably is
unconstitutional”. The question, if you ask me, remains whether it isn't in
fact undemocratic for 1% of a nation to cling onto 40% of that nation's
wealth. In fact, Annie Lowrey, in an article titled **Cancel Billionaires**,
states that that "dramatic inequality in wealth means dramatic inequality in
terms of political power means a political system unresponsive to what most
people want. Wealth inequality, in other words, is an anti-democratic force."
However, having as much money as people like Bezos, Microsoft's Bill Gates
(both worth over $100 billion) and Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg do means that
they have tremendous influence over political processes– and though these
names are all of American billionaires, this is seen in countries all across
the world. Collins states that over the past few decades, they've used this
power to "slash their tax bills astoundingly over the last few decades".
"According to our data," he says, "the taxes paid by America's billionaires,
measured as a percentage of their wealth, decreased by a stunning 79% between
1980 and 2018." With these powerful men influencing policy in their favour, it
may seem pretty hopeless to the rest of us. Lowrey points out that unequal
societies tend not to correct themselves exactly because of the political
influence of the rich.

### But does it really have to be this way?

[caption id="attachment_5923" align="aligncenter" width="1333"] source :
https://indepth.oxfam.org.uk/time-to-care/[/caption] “The gap between rich and
poor can’t be resolved without deliberate inequality-busting policies, and too
few governments are committed to these,” Oxfam India CEO Amitabh Behar said in
a press statement. According to the Oxfam report, a fairer world – one that
benefits the 99% instead of the 1%– is possible, but it will require work. The
Oxfam report found that if the world's richest 1% paid just 0.5% more in tax
over ten years, it would equal the investment needed to add over 100 million
jobs in workforces like health, education and childcare. Instead of hoarding
wealth that could never be spent in one lifetime, the mega-rich could fuel the
economy in valuable ways and give back to the society that built them. The
following post also analyses the net worth of the 5 richest men in the world
and points out just how a small percentage of their net worth could have been
better used elsewhere:
[embed]https://www.instagram.com/p/CC9hvVyBe7F/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_link[/embed]
For decades, the world's extremely wealthy have managed to dodge criticism by
branding themselves as success stories and innovators to be admired, or worse,
white knights who, through their philanthropic efforts, can supposedly save
the world. Just a handful of these super rich men could team up and make
tangible change with just a fraction of their wealth. If they truly are the
heroes they claim to be, why have we not seen that change yet? Billionaires
shouldn't exist, but when it comes to wealth, in most societies, the game is
rigged. The rich get richer, while the majority of us are left worrying about
what our finances will look like in a couple of months, or worse.
Billionaire's shouldn't exist, but it's not about blaming one or two specific
billionaires in particular – although what would be small change to Jeff Bezos
could very well solve the crises we're seeing in Yemen right now – but we
should focus on fixing a broken and detrimental system. Billionaire's
shouldn't exist, but since we're stuck with them, the onus is on us – the
normal people, the governments, and the disenfranchised – to hold them to
account and to continue to pint out the exploitation that comes hand-in hand
with their ballooning net worth. And if all else fails, eat the rich.

* * *

### Learn more by taking a deep dive into the sources for this article:

  * _** I never expected to go viral just for saying billionaires shouldn’t exist**_

  * _**Billionaires are getting even richer from the pandemic. Enough is enough**_
  * _**America has almost 800 billionaires, a record high**_

  * **_Why does everybody suddenly hate billionaires? Because they’ve made it easy._**

  * **_Young Americans say billionaires do more harm than good, study shows_**

  * **_Cancel Billionaires_**
  * _**Should Billionaires Exist? Sanders, Warren and Steyer Debate It**_



**Author:** Melissa Da Costa